---
layout: post
title: Unpleasant Work Under Socialism
author: Alex Sparrow
date: 2021-03-14
tags: [labor, automation]
---

**Prompt:** *Every socialist society will have a class of jobs that people just plain won't love to do (with a few exceptions, since humans aren't a monolith). Some big examples include trash collection, janitorial work, and any job in which you're in some amount of physical danger. How would you allocate such jobs to make sure people fill them?*

Every socialist society must be understood as being in a state of flux tending toward communism from the capitalist conditions that it was founded in. A socialist society, then, is one in which we progressively replace private property with common property, markets with planning, law enforcement with restorative justice, bureaucracy with participatory democracy, and so on. Our solution to the problems involved in the division of labor will also be a question of progress, with no one solution being immediately applied, but solved piecemeal under the conditions in which problems are posed. In the context of North America, we can ask how we manage the division of labor regarding unpleasant labor in the context of an advanced post-industrial economy in a decaying imperial core.

The distribution of labor will be uneven and contested as the proletarian state advances socialist goals in worker self-management, poverty eradication, universal health and education, social equality, and liberation of oppressed peoples, while maintaining a productivity capable of providing for these objectives. Socialism is pursued in various specific struggles, with multiple solutions during different periods and in different places. Our solutions to problems may not be completely satisfactory to our ideals as we work out the contradictions along the way.

Given that North America is an advanced, post-industrial society, we might think that automation is the easy answer, but I believe that this is illusory. Because of the poverty wages that most of North America labors under, the automation pursued by capital currently is largely geared to replacing expensive labor. A proletarian and communal state will have to refocus research and development towards elimination of undesired labor. Automation may be the ultimate solution to this problem, but socialists have to contend with the fact that this may be a long time coming. Therefore, someone will have to do the dirty work. The question is, what is a fair way to get people to do these jobs that most closely approximates our credo, “From each according to their ability, to each according to their needs”?

Under late, extinction-level capitalism, this labor is allocated to those who will bear the costs of the labor for the wage at which it is offered. Some of this labor is so dangerous that it commands a high price to those who are willing to take the risk. Some of it is simply monotonous, dirty, and undesirable, and so commands a low price. In either case, subjecting the condition of labor to markets is obviously something to avoid. 

The market as an instrument of economic coordination will be with us under socialism for some time after its success until the infrastructure for full-scale participatory and worker-managed planning can be completed. Given that this infrastructure is both social, cultural, and material, implementation of a fully planned economy of production and distribution under common ownership will be uneven and contested. Ultimately, the goal is for workers to collectively produce their own jobs through a process of democratic planning. Even as that is progressively realized though, markets will persist as planning is developed, including markets in labor. So the first question is, how can we address undesirable labor in the context of a labor market in a new socialist economy? 

In On the Economic Theory of Socialism, the Polish socialist economist, Oskar Lange, discussed how socialist societies could use the mathematics of bourgeois economists to surpass the supposed efficiency of markets. While markets exist for labor and consumer goods, the economy as a whole is planned. To ensure that prices for consumer goods are ‘correct,’ i.e. that the prices are such that there is neither a surplus or deficit of such goods, the central planning board continuously revises prices up if there are shortages and down if there are surpluses. This ‘trial-and-error’ method should result in consumer goods being distributed, provided that the public enterprises adhere to certain technical requirements.

Lange suggests a different method of pricing labor. Initially, it may seem natural to say that wages in a socialist economy would be equal, or roughly so. As Lange points out, this is not the case, for what we are really concerned with, as socialists, is how well money satisfies need (so long as money persists). As some work is more unpleasant or more dangerous, equal incomes would not equally satisfy needs. A crabber may work long hours in freezing waters to catch crab, and their needs are not equal to the clerical worker in a heated office with a comfortable chair. The crabber’s need is greater and their income should reflect that - their hours of labor less and their consumption more. Because the work of the clerical worker is so much more comfortable, less income would be justified. As Lange puts it, “The choice of an occupation offering a lower money income, but also a smaller disutility, may be interpreted as the purchase of leisure, safety, agreeableness of work, etc., at a price equal to the difference between the money income earned in that particular occupation and in others….”

This method was not been available to many of the really existing socialist societies of the past, due to the relative scarcity of highly-skilled labor in the less industrialized societies where those revolutions took hold. Thus, greater incomes and other benefits were given to professionals to encourage their loyalty to the revolution and the desire of young people to enter such trades. We hope that this would not be the case in a post-industrial society like North America, where people have more education than jobs to satisfy that level of education. 

One might wonder if this solution differs from the capitalist division of labor, and the answer is - somewhat. Under capitalism, the wage offered is what the market can bear. Under socialism, the wage offered is calculated by the relative danger and unpleasantness of the work. The result is the same (although more consistently applied in socialism) - more undesirable work means higher wages, which attracts people willing to do that work for that money. Because the distribution of income (consumption rights) is planned, though, the income is not left to market forces, but calculated to make up for the unpleasantness.

As money is replaced by planned provision according to need, as the labor market is replaced by worker self-management, so the ability to use income to distribute consumer goods will vanish. But the unpleasant work will still need to be done. How do we divide this labor?

To some extent, the labor is part of occupying a space. Our neighborhoods, workplaces, schools, etc need to be cleaned and maintained, and some degree of that maintenance falls to those using that space as a requirement for using it. Currently, landlords have the responsibility of maintaining apartment buildings, for example. When the tenants become the landlord, that responsibility falls to the tenants. This is not unfamiliar to the capitalist context. From Red Bologna (pg. 58), regarding housing cooperatives currently operating in Bologna:

‘In our block, a great number of people were interested in helping the building,’ says Romano Rizzo, a street sweeper and resident of Barca. ‘We have held meetings and considered what the maintenance involves. Then, responsible people were elected to every office. For instance the ‘caposcala’ (staircase chief) supervises the cleanliness of the staircase.’

So, participating in the undesirable and monotonous maintenance of places - according to one’s ability - through the allocation of tasks by their governing committees would be a requirement of using those spaces. This should be uncontroversial. If you share in the use of a space, you should help maintain it.

We can apply this principle more broadly to require some degree of civil conscription. Civil conscription, like military conscription, obliges persons of a certain age to perform service for their community. Civil conscription for disaster relief and emergency management will become vital for the coming climate catastrophes. Youth would be required to do all the work of emergency preparation, response, mitigation, and recovery, through collective self-management. Such work would give people basic knowledge and experience across multiple social domains, including public health and sanitation, public safety, and environmental stewardship, as well as the democratic self-discipline and administrative skills necessary to manage one’s own workplace and community. 

People in the modern United States typically balk at the idea of conscription, for good reason. While once conscription meant a “citizen’s” army for the defense of national borders, the imperial wars of the postwar world shattered the white-supremacist illusions of the US as a peaceful republic. The citizen-soldier was mere meat for the grinder of colonial wars, and if those soldiers survived, they would be thrown away or be inducted into the empire’s colonial police at home. Combined with the petit-bourgeois liberalism of the 1960’s, the concept of conscription has been off the table since its cynical abolition in 1973. ‘Coercion’ is a concept that USians have been struggling with for some time, but only through a modern, liberal lens that was made for the freedom of trade, not persons.

To be required to undertake some actions, including by short-time conscription, cannot be avoided by the simple nature of ‘rights’ themselves. For one person to have a right to anything, others must have a duty to fulfill that right. For me to have a right to my life means that everyone else is at least required not to take my life, and even to protect my life if it is threatened. We are accustomed to these rights being socialized and turned over to an alienated state apparatus. But a socialist, proletarian, plurinational, and communal state is not alienated. All the powers of the state are wielded by the people themselves. Such a society in North America, in the 21st century, requires less the defense of its territory and more the protection of its its peoples’ lives against natural disaster.

In near-term socialism, then, the proletarian state can intervene in the job market to compensate workers who take on the unpleasant work. But this only works so long as the market in labor exists and money has not been replaced by social provisioning. As social provisioning replaces money exchange, and labor planning replaces the labor market, labor obligations, both as a local obligation for sharing space and a social obligation for workers to have their needs fulfilled. This state of affairs will persist until the automation of unpleasant work makes it obsolete, and the working class realizes its absolute freedom in communism.